The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Charitable Pestmaster, by Thomas Sherwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Charitable Pestmaster
       Or, The cure of the Plague

Author: Thomas Sherwood

Release Date: March 1, 2020 [EBook #61537]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHARITABLE PESTMASTER ***




Produced by David Wilson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
made using scans of public domain works put online by
Harvard University Library's Open Collections Program.)









Transcriber’s Note


This document uses the “long s” character ſ extensively, so is best
viewed with a font containing that symbol.




                         THE

               Charitable Peſtmaſter,

                         OR,

                   The cure of the

                       PLAGUE,

  Conteining a few ſhort and neceſſary inſtructions
   how to preſerve the body from infection of the
     P L A G V E, as alſo to cure thoſe that are
                      Infected.

     _Together with a little treatiſe concerning
              the cure of the Small Pox._

   Publiſhed for the benefit of the poore of this
          City and not unmeet for the Rich,

  _By T h o m a s  S h e r w o o d Practitioner in
                      PHYSICK._

                   _2 Kings 20.7._

   _And I S A I A H ſaid, take a lump of Figs, and
    they tooke, and laid it upon the boil, and he
                     recovered._


                       LONDON
   Printed by _A.N._ for _John Francklin_, and are
    to be ſold at his Shop in _Lothbury_, neer the
                   Windmill. 1641.




  To the Worſhipfull _Alexander Read_,
    Doctor of Phyſick and Chirurgery,
       one of the Societie of the
        Colledge of Phyſicians for
          the Citie of _London_.


_Sir, having finiſhed this_ treatiſe, _I conſidered what entertainment
it might find in the world; and fearing, that it would be envied, for
the good that it offereth unto this Kingdome, as I the Author have
been for my practice, I bethought my ſelfe that it might ſafely hover
under your wings, whereupon I am bold to thruſt it into your
protection, that it may the better be defended from the calumnies of
theſe times. The Subject of it is, that which I have practiſed and
proved by Experience, ſo that if there bee occaſion, I believe I ſhall
bee able to render ſufficient reaſons to prove it, from the moſt
Authentique rules in Phyſick. And if there be any errors eſcaped in
it, I ſhall rather deſire that they may be corrected by the diſcretiõ
of you or any of the Colledg of Phyſicians, than diſputed upon by new
beginners in the practice of Phyſick, who have but ſmall experience.
As for thoſe Medicines publiſhed at the latter end of this booke, I
ſhall not deſire your protection for them, becauſe I never made you,
nor any man acquainted with them. For I intended that they ſhould be
Protectors for themſelves: but however I hope that my endeavours in
this ſmall treatiſe will not be unpleaſant, but acceptable to you, for
the good which I believe it will do in the World; and ſo for this time
I reſt in ſome meaſure of aſſurance of your worſhips favour._

                                        Your Servant,
                                            Tho: Sherwood.




_To the friendly Reader._


Having conſidered with my ſelfe in theſe dangerous times the great
diſtreſſes of the poore of this City, by reaſon of the contagious
diſeaſe of the peſtilence, now reigning amongſt them; and ſeeing them
to be altogether ignorant, in the uſe of thoſe meanes that are
convenient for their cure, as purging, vomiting, bleeding, ſweating,
and the like: Therefore conſidering what good theſe few rules
(experimented by my ſelfe) may do unto many, I was thereby moved to
print them, for the benefit of ſuch who want the helpe of the
skilfull and faithfull Phyſician. For the underſtanding and memory of
thoſe that ſhall have occaſion to uſe them, I have divided them into
three Chapters, with contents. As for the medicines preſcribed, they
are ſold by Apothecaries, who may afford them reaſonably to the
poore: The others adjoyned I ſhall give to the poore for Gods ſake,
  and the rich ſhall have them for competent ſatisfaction;
              but I ſhall eſteeme it my greateſt
                 reward, if any ſhall receive
                     good and benefit by
                       my ſmall labours
                        and endevours.

                                        _Thine T. S._




CHAP. 1.

  _1. What are the cauſes of the Peſtilence. 2. How they are
   avoided. 3. Means to preſerve the body from Infection._


There are divers cauſes of this diſeaſe. The firſt is ſin, which ought
to be repented of. The ſecond an infected and corrupted air, which
ſhould be avoided. The third an evill diet, which ſhould be amended.
The fourth are evill humours heaped together in the body, being apt
to putrifie, and beget a Fever, which muſt be taken away by convenient
medicines.

Therefore whoſoever would preſerve their bodies from infection, let
them firſt make their peace with God, in whoſe hand is the power of
life and death. Then let them uſe the meanes, and ſhun all thoſe
things that are able to beget this diſeaſe, as all infected and
corrupted aire, all fogges and miſts that do ariſe from the earth or
water, and all ſtinking ſmels that do ariſe from dunghills, ſinks,
graves, carrion, ſnuffs of candles, or rotten fruits, or any thing
elſe that doth putrifie and ſtink. Abſtain from all meats and drinks
that beget rottenneſſe and filthineſſe in the body (& ſo conſequently
a Fever or the Plague) as exceſſive eating of fruits, eſpecially thoſe
that are unripe. Alſo forbear all ſorts of fiſh that have neither
ſcales nor ſhels, as Eels, Lampreys, and the like. Laſtly, take heed
of over-charging the ſtomacke with meats, or drinks, or hot Wines;
but eſpecially your unripe medium Wines.

If any ſhall find themſelves oppreſſed with groſs & corrupt humors, ſo
that they are in danger of this diſeaſe they ſhall be cleanſed, by
taking one ounce and half, or two ounces, of the infuſion _Crocus
metallorum_, (which is to be bought at every Apothecaries) & put to it
_Oximel_ half an ounce, this ſhall give them five or ſix vomits, and
almoſt as many ſtooles. And after every vomit, let them drinke ſome
warme poſſet drinke; ſo let them keepe themſelves warme that day: one
houre after it hath done working let them eat a meſſe of warm broth
made with a neck of Mutton, or with ſuch freſh meat as the ſick are
beſt able to buy; of which meat let them eat ſparingly for the
preſent. Thoſe that are ſo tender or weakly that they cannot brook
this vomit, they may be very well purged from corrupt humours, by
taking one or two drams of _pilulæ Peſtilentiales_: But the poorer
ſort that cannot goe to this charge, may take inſtead thereof _Aloes_
one dram in the pap of an Apple, ſtewed Prunes, or elſe in a little
Ale or Beere. This pill, and this _Aloes_, are excellent remedies for
women and children, and they are ſo ſafe that women with child may
take them. After the bodie is purged, it ſhall be neceſſary to draw
ſix or eight ounces of bloud from the liver or middle vein of the
arme, if the partie be able to ſuſtain the loſſe of it.

Such as have lived temperatly and ſparingly, and ſo conſequently are
not oppreſſed with corrupted humours, ſuch ſhall not need any the
aforeſaid evacuations or purgations; but let them ſhun, as much as
they can, all infectious and corrupted aire: But ſeeing it is a thing
almoſt impoſsible in the Citie of _London_; therefore they that are
timorous and fearefull may carry about them the roots of _Enula
campana_, and _Angelica_, dried or candied, of which they may bite now
and then. Alſo the waters of _Scabios_, _Angelica_, or _Pimpernell_,
are great preſervations for children againſt the Plague, if two
ſpoonfuls thereof be taken in a morning faſting.




CHAP. 2.

  _1 By what ſignes you may know whether the ſick be infected with
   the Peſtilence. 2 How thoſe ſignes doe encreaſe or decreaſe every
   day; 3 Whether life or death be likely to enſue; 4 A caveat not
   to tamper with thoſe that begin to amend of themſelves._


Thoſe that are infected with the Peſtilence, in the beginning or firſt
day thereof, are taken with an extraordinary cold outwardly, and a
burning heate inwardly, a great paine and girding about the ſtomacke,
a ſluggiſhneſſe and drouſineſſe of the whole body, a loſſe of appetite,
a bitterneſſe in the throat, with a deſire to vomit, & ſometimes they
do vomit.

The diſeaſe continuing unto the ſecond and third day, the heate
breaketh outwardly, ſtronger, and ſtronger, ſo that there followeth a
great paine in the head, and a difficulty of breathing, ſuperfluous
ſleeps, and ſometimes ſuperfluous watchings, they grow frantike and
light-headed, and they looke very ſtaringly: And if there doth any
ſwelling appear under the eares, armes, cheeks, or groines, and that
theſe ſignes aforenamed doe begin to ceaſe, Then ſhall the ſick
recover immediatly without any medicine, onely give him a plaſter or
pulteſſe to ripen the tumour, which muſt be applyed the next day after
the ſwelling appeareth; but give him nothing inwardly, except it be a
warme Caudle, or Ale-brue, or Broth; for if you give him a vomit or
purge, you ſhall ſtrike the ſwelling into the noble parts, and the
ſick ſhall be in danger of his life: and if you let him bloud, you
ſhall draw the venemous humour from the Soare into the veins, and
diſperſe it with the bloud through the whole body, and thereby deſtroy
the health of the patient, and ſhorten his life; as it came to paſſe
with a good friend of mine. Alſo if you give him any medicine to
provoke ſweat, you ſhall reſtore the Fever again, and ſo the ſicke
ſhall die without redemption; yea, and more miſerably, then thoſe that
never amended, unleſſe God be more mercifull unto him; whereof I have
had a ſorrowfull experience.

Therefore bee carefull that you doe not tamper with thoſe that do
begin to amend: for thoſe very Medicines that are excellently
available againſt any Fevers in the beginning or encreaſe of them,
being given in the declination or recovery, will bring the patient
into a Relapſe, which is worſe then the former diſeaſe, and which
ſhall greatly endanger life. For how many have died by the
unſeaſonable taking of Treacle, Mithridate, and other good Medicines?
Wherefore I have often ſaid, that a skilfull Phyſician by watching his
time ſhall doe more with a cup of warme drinke in the cure of the
Plague, or any Fever, then the ignorant ſhall do with all the
excellent Medicines that are in the Apothecaries Shop.

Now if the riſing doe appear, & that the ſymptoms or ſignes aforenamed
doe not begin to ceaſe, but rather encreaſe, Then ſhortly after there
will appeare ſome blains or ſpots, & ſo death enſueth, unleſſe you
draw ten or twelve ounces of bloud (according to the ſtrength of the
ſick) from the liver or middle vein of the arme, on that ſide where
the riſing is.

But if ſo be that the ſickneſſe continueth unto the third and fourth
day, and the ſymptomes remaine in their full vigour, then ſhortly will
the ſpots come forth; and then I know no medicine that can deliver
from death, except God be more mercifull to the ſick: But only on the
third day before the ſpots appear it ſhall be greatly available to
give him one of the cordial ſweats preſcribed in the enſuing Chapter.




CHAP. 3.

  _1 Here are preſcribed certain approved remedies for the cure of
   the Peſtilence, 2 The order and manner how to uſe them._


Whoſoever ſhal perceive their bodies infected with the Plague, let
them take on the firſt day of the ſickneſſe the vomit, in that order
and manner as it is laid down in the firſt Chapter. And after it hath
done working with them, they ſhal find themſelves as well as ever
they were in their lives: for it clenſeth the ſtomack and bowels from
al corrupt humours, which is one of the chiefeſt cauſes of the
ſicknes. But if the ſick be weak and cannot bear a vomit, it ſhall be
good to give him one dram of the foreſaid _pillulæ peſtilentiales_, or
inſtead thereof one dram of _Aloes_, you may give it either in pill or
in potion, according as the ſick can beſt take it, and in the working
of it let him drink ſome warm broth.

But if it be ſo, that this courſe hath been neglected the firſt day,
or beyond the time of 24 houres, it will bee in vaine to uſe it the
ſecond day: Yea, it will bee dangerous, ſeeing that the infection is
diſperſed by the bloud throughout all the Veines of the bodie.
Therefore on the ſecond day of Viſitation it ſhall bee good to draw
from the Median Veine of the arme ſo much bloud as the patient can
endure to bleed: and if the ſicke hath not gone to the ſtoole during
the time of his ſickneſſe, you ſhall give him either before or after
bleeding this Clyſter. _Take of Beets, Violet leaves, Burrage,
Bugloſſe, Scabios, of each one handfull, French barley one ounce;
boyle all theſe in a ſufficient quantitie of water untill it be halfe
conſumed, then ſtrain it, and take three quarters of a pint of the
decoction, and put to it of the Electuary of Hierapicra five or ſixe
drams, oile of Rue one dram, red Sugar one ounce, the yolk of an egge,
and a little ſalt; ſo make you a Clyſter thereof and adminiſter it
bloud warme._ Alſo you may adminiſter to the ſick this Clyſter. _Boyle
an handfull of Rue in a pint of poſſet drinke, and put to it a piece
of ſweet butter, a little honey, the yolke of an egge, and a thimble
full of ſalt; make a clyſter and adminiſter it bloud warme._

But if that the ſick amend not upon this courſe taken the ſecond day,
or that this means hath not been uſed, but that hee continued ſick
untill the third and fourth day, ſo that the infection hath taken hold
of the vitall ſpirits, Then keeping him warme in his bed, you ſhall
uſe this Cordiall to ſweat with all. _Take of the water of Scabios,
Burrage, Bugloſſe, and Angelica, of each halfe an ounce, the Electuary
of egges two ſcruples, or one dram, of Bole Armoniak one ſcruple,
Syrrup of Roſes halfe an ounce, make it into a potion_, and let the
ſick drink it up at once or twice: two or three ſpoonfuls hereof is
ſufficient for a child. Or the poorer ſort may take two peny-worth of
Treacle or Mithridate, in a quarter of a pint of Dragon water. With
either of theſe Medicines you may ſweat the ſick, untill ſome tumour
doth appeare, or that he commeth to know himſelfe amended. For this is
the laſt medicinall refuge we have in the cure of the Plague. If you
can, keep the ſick from drinking and ſleeping for the ſpace of three
houres untill the medicine hath done working. But if you cannot, let
the patient drinke a little Limon poſſet, made with ſome Marigold
flowers, and Harts horn.

And if ſignes of amendment doe appeare, doe not take him out of his
bed, or let him coole ſuddenly: But let him ſweat on gently of his own
accord, for it is natures ſweat following the medicine, which will doe
him more good than a Kingdome. In this laſt ſweat you may give him
ſome Caudle or Alebrue: & when the ſweats begin to ceaſe of themſelves,
& his skin grows dry and warme, then let him ſit up by a good fire;
Aire his cloathes, and ſo let him give God thanks for his life.

Adde, if any tumour appeare you may ripen it with this Emplaſter.
_Take ſix figs, raiſins of the Sun ſtoned half an ounce, ſalt two
drams, honey one ounce, beat them all together, and heat it well with
ſome oile of Camomill upon the fire, ſo ſpread it upon ſome cloth_,
and lay it warm to the tumour, ſhifting it every twelve houres untill
it look with a white head: and when it is ripe, if it be difficult to
break, lay to it ſome Gooſe dung made warme with ſome ſweet butter or
ſallet oile; alſo the root of a white Lilly roſted, with ſome ſorrell,
to which put a piece of ſweet butter, & apply it very warm to the
ſoare, But if it will not break with this means, then you muſt open it
with a penknife or lancet; elſe the corruption will rot the fleſh,
even to the very bone, and when you have opened it, ſqueeze out the
corruption with your hands, and put into the ſoare, a tent made with
_unguentum baſilicon_, or _Ægyptiacum, & mel roſarum_, and lay upon
the tent a plaſter made with _Diachilon_: Continue your tents untill
all the corruption be drawn out, then the plaſter of _Diachilon_ will
cure it perfectly.

If any that are ancient or weak ſhall be infected with the Peſtilence,
it ſhall not be neceſſary to give them any purge, vomit, or ſweat, or
to let them bloud; becauſe they cannot beare the loſſe of ſo many
ſpirits as are ſpent by ſuch evacuations. Therefore you may lay upon
the pit of the ſtomack of the ſicke a young live puppy, and if the
ſick can but ſleep the ſpace of three or foure houres, they ſhall
recover preſently, and the dog ſhall die of the Plague. This I have
known approved; and I do believe that it will be a cure for all leane,
ſpare, and weake bodies both yong and old: provided, that the dog be
yonger then the ſick.




_Certaine Inſtructions for the cure of the Small Pox._


The nature of the Smal Pox diſperſed this yeer throughout many parts
of this Kingdome, I have found to bee more malignant, then any that
have reigned in my remembrance; ſo that many of all ages and ſexes,
but eſpecially children have miſerably died of them: becauſe for the
moſt part, the peſtilence is joyned with them, as it doth plainly
appeare by thoſe ſpots, blains, and riſings, that follow them. I have
likewiſe obſerved that thoſe medicines, as _Mithridate_, _Treacle_,
_Saffron_ and the like, that formerly have cured the ſmall Pox, now
availe nothing: yea, they are dangerous, if inwardly taken (eſpecially
if the Patient hath been long ſick) but if they be outwardly applyed,
as I ſhall ſhew eft-ſoons, they will prove good remedies at this time.
But how many a tender hearted mother have I ſeen that, out of an
unhappie care of her ſicke childe, hath by raſh counſel & the
unſeaſonable giving to it hot cordiall medicines, encreaſed the Fever,
multiplyed the matter of the ſmall pox, and inflamed the Spirits, ſo
that the Peſtilence hath many times followed. But howſoever the child
hath beene uncurable, which otherwiſe if nothing at all, or elſe ſome
ſmall thing of little ſtrength, had been adminiſtred, might have
recovered; whereupon I obſerved the ſundry ways and meanes practiſed
by Phyſitians, women, and my ſelfe, and ſeeing the diverſe events of
them, I laboured to find out a certain and ſecure way for the cure of
this diſeaſe; which having found by experience I have (together with
this treatiſe of the Plague) ſent it to the Preſſe, hoping that no man
will either hate mee, or envie mee, for doing good, and that thoſe
that find benefit by it will thank me for it.

The Primitive or externall cauſes of the Small Pox are all one with
thoſe which are of the Plague, as an evill and corrupted aire, a
diſorderly dyet, that begets ſurfets; as alſo for the antecedent
cauſes which are corrupt humours heaped together in the body:
therefore thoſe meanes that I have preſcribed in the firſt Chapter to
preſerve the bodie from the infection of the Plague, they will alſo
bee a meanes to preſerve from the Small Pox. Thoſe that are taken ſick
this yeere with the Small Pox are affected after the ſame manner as
thoſe that are infected with the peſtilence, & in the beginning it can
ſcarcely be diſcerned by an expert Phyſitian from it, But only by
theſe ſignes.

Thoſe that are infected by the ſmall Pox are not ſo violently affected
with heat and cold, nor pains in the ſtomack and head, as thoſe that
are ſick with the Peſtilence.

Moreover, thoſe that will have the ſmall Pox their skin is puft up,
and blown like a bladder, ſo that their face and eyes doe ſhine: they
have a great itching in many parts of their bodies, but chiefly about
their Noſe; they yawn much, alſo they finde a great paine and
heavineſſe in their back bone.

Now if you ſhall perceive by theſe ſignes, that the ſick will have the
ſmall Pox, keep him warm, but not too hot; neither let him take cold;
but give him breathing room enough, as he lyeth in his bed: Then lay a
plaſter of Mithridate or Treacle to the pit of his ſtomack, and if hee
be at mans eſtate, let him drinke up all this Cordiall by two or three
ſpoonfuls at a time every houre; but if it be a child, the one halfe
will be ſufficient. _Take of the waters of Roſes, Burrage, Bugloſſe,
and Treacle-water, of each an ounce & half, of the ſyrrup of Limons,
and Clove-gilly-flowers of each one ounce, mix them together, and make
thereof a potion_: Alſo the poorer ſort may take _Roſes, Burrage,
Carduus, Marigold Flowers, and Harts horn, of each a like quantitie,
and boyle them in poſſet drinke, turned with a Limon, or white wine_:
for one above twenty yeers of age let him drink three quarters of a
pint at ſeverall times, ſweetned with Sugar; and for a child halfe the
quantitie will ſuffice. Let the ſick ſweat gently with either of theſe
Medicines ſo long as hee can well endure it: for the longer the
better; ſeeing the Medicines of themſelves are no violent ſweats; &
during the ſweat you may give him now and then to quench his thirſt a
very little Limon poſſet-drink by it ſelf. If he can you may let him
ſleep whilſt he ſweateth. And if hee lie quiet during the ſweat, by
Gods bleſſing, within the ſpace of eight or ten houres at the moſt, he
ſhall find himſelf finely recovered of his ſickneſſe. Then give him no
more of his Cordial or ſweating poſſet drink, but only of his
Limõ-poſſet drink, if he be thirſty; but let him lie warm in his bed
til his skin grow dry, then ſhortly after the Pox will begin to ſhew
themſelves. But they will not bee many although every one of them
will be far greater then the ſmall Pox do uſe to be; yet none of them
will pit except they be much tampered withal, or picked with the
nails. But if ſo be that thoſe which have white heads do burn and rage
extreamly, you may prick their heads with a Needle and let out the
corruption: there is nothing elſe to be done with thoſe upon whom they
are come out, and the Fever abated but that they keepe themſelves
warm, ſit ſtill and be quiet.

But if that the ſick hath not gone to ſtool in a long time: before you
give him this Cordiall to ſweat, you ſhall cauſe him to goe to ſtoole
by a clyſter, or elſe which is better by a Suppoſitor made with Honey
and Salt, or a Violet Comfit. And if the ſicke bee yong, ſtrong, and
full of bloud, you ſhall without danger doe very well, if you draw
from him eight or ten ounces of bloud before you lay him to ſweat; for
then the Cordiall will have more power, room, and liberty, to play
upon the diſeaſe, and will the ſooner and better drive out the Pox. If
the _quinteſſentia vitæ_ be given in the waters of Roſes, Burrage, or
Bugloſſe, it will drive out the ſmall Pox without ſweating, and cure
the ſick immediatly.

But if the ſmall Pox be come forth, and that the Fever continue in his
full vigour ſtill, ſo that the ſick doth not amend, but grow worſe and
worſe, then you ſhall not give them any hot Medicines inwardly, nor
any thing that doth provoke ſweat; for now hot cordiall Medicines will
encreaſe the Fever (and in the beginning they would have quenched the
Fever) and turn all the humours of the body into the matter of the
ſmall Pox; ſo that there is nothing but a miſerable death likely to
follow, oftentimes accompanied with the Peſtilence.

This evill is much practiſed by thoſe women that pretẽd they wil drive
the ſmal Pox further out, when they are come out already. Wherefore
they do but beget the Fever again, and where there are but ten they
will make a thouſand. Therefore be carefull in this caſe, what you do,
and give to the ſick every hower nothing elſe but two or three
ſpoonefulls of Roſe water, ſweetened with a little ſugar. This will
coole the body, quench the Fever, cauſe reſt, and then a ſtoole, and
thereby the ſick ſhall recover preſently. By theſe meanes I have cured
many very ſuddenly that have been dangerouſly ſick in all mens ſight
even to Death, as many in the City can beare mee witneſſe.

As I have warned you not to give many hot things when the ſmall Pox
are come forth, ſo I would have you beware of giving thoſe that are
very cold, as the waters of Plantane, Letice, Purſlane, Poppy, and the
like; which (as I have Knowne) have relieved many for the preſent, and
wrought an admirable cure in the ſight of the common people; but by
their cold qualities, they have ſo congealed and ſetled the humours in
the body, that the ſick will never be healthfull all the daies of
their lives, as I could inſtance in many.




Thoſe that deſire further information concerning any particulars not
expreſſed at larg in this brief Treatiſe, they ſhall be fully
ſatisfied, if they repaire to the Author living in Hony-ſuckle Court
in Grub-ſtreet, where he hath by Chimicall Art prepared ſix
Catholicall Medicines, with which hee cureth the Peſtilence, ſmall
Pox, and moſt curable diſeaſes whatſoever.


_1 Vomitivum Benedictum._

This Medicine being taken from five graines to eight, in ſome
convenient diſtilled water or wine, or elſe with ſome Conſerve or
Pill, doth ſafely purge upwards and downwards, ſo that it may be given
to a Childe, of three or foure yeeres of age: it cureth all diſeaſes
that ariſe from the foulneſſe of the ſtomack, and is good in the
beginning of the Peſtilence, ſmall Pox, or any Fever, or Ague.


_2 Catharticum Catholicum._

The doſe of it is from ten grains to twenty, it purgeth gently by
ſtoole, and clenſeth the lower belly from all offenſive humours, &
cureth the French Pox, Scurvy, Jaundis, and Dropſie, alſo it freeth
children from Worms.


_3 Diureticum Aperitivum._

This openeth all obſtructions of the body, but chiefly of the Liver,
Spleen, Reines, and Bladder, it cureth the Jaundis and the Rickets in
children, alſo it helpeth thoſe that cannot make water.


_4 Diaphoreticum Cordiale._

This being given in a ſmall doſe doth gently provoke ſweat, expelleth
all venomous humours from the heart outwardly, and driveth out the
ſmall Pox, thruſteth out the tumours in the Peſtilence, and ſome it
cureth without bringing forth a Riſing.


_5 Quinta Eſſentia vitæ._

This reviveth the vitall ſpirits, and hath an admirable vertue in
fortifying the heart againſt all infectious, & venemous vapours; ſo
that it is good for thoſe that have occaſiõ to viſit ſick people. If
ten or twelve drops thereof be taken in a mornings draught it
preſerveth the body from infection, and if twenty or thirty drops of
it bee given to the ſicke of the Peſtilence, within the ſpace of ſixe
houres after they are infected, they ſhall be cured in one hour, as I
have often proved: it driveth out the ſmall Pox, and cureth the ſick
without ſweating.


_6 Iulapium Reſtaurativum._

By the vertue this Medicine hath in reſiſting the putrifaction of
humours, it doth cure all ſorts of Fevers and Agues, it may be given
in any time of the diſeaſe, but eſpecially in the latter end of the
ſickneſſe, when no other Medicine can be adminiſtred without danger.
With it I have cured the Hectick Fever, and thoſe that have faln into
the Relapſe of the ſmall Pox, and ſuch as have been nigh unto death,
by reaſon of violent Fevers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Any of the aforeſaid Medicines, the Author adminiſtreth both outwardly
and inwardly in many ſeverall wayes and manners, according to the age,
temperature, complexion, and diſpoſition, of the bodie; and according
to the nature, degrees, and time of the diſeaſe.

  _Artis_ Apollineæ _vis ſola eſt numen_ Olympi,
    _Quo ſine languenti Pharmaca fruſtra dabis._

   If that our art from God receive not ſtrength,
   In vain we ſeek mans life for to prolength.


_FINIS._



Transcriber’s Note


Four typographical errors have been corrected: “Scabies” replaced by
“Scabios”, “for for” by “for”, “Safforn” replaced by “Saffron”, and
“harh” by “hath”.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Charitable Pestmaster, by Thomas Sherwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHARITABLE PESTMASTER ***

***** This file should be named 61537-0.txt or 61537-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/5/3/61537/

Produced by David Wilson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
made using scans of public domain works put online by
Harvard University Library's Open Collections Program.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
